Fable of the Hawk and the Hokioi
This is a tale of a contest that took place between Kahu the hawk and Hokioi or Hakuwai as to which could fly to the greatest altitude, and in which contest the boastful Kahu was defeated. The Maori tells us that the hokioi or hakuwai is a bird that abides in the heavens or on lofty peaks, that it never descends to the lowlands, but that it is occasionally heard far overhead in the dead of night crying its own name: "Hakuwai! Hakuwai! Hoho!"—or as others give it: "Hokioi! Hokioi! Hu!" This presumably mythical bird is said to have been a descendant of Tangaroa and Rehua, and it is said to be peculiar for having wings with four joints. An article in the Waka Maori of 1872 states that the hokioi has long been extinct, that it had a form of crest on its head and that its plumage was of divers colours, red, black, white, yellow and green. A song of yore addresses the bird as: "A hokioi on high, a hokioi on high,—hu! Dwelling afar in celestial space, the sleeping companion of Whaitiri-matakataka." This latter name is a title of Hine-whaitiri the Thunder Maid, she who dwells far above and hard by the Cloud House. An account of the fable follows:—

"About that bird the hokioi; our ancestors saw it, but we have not; it is now extinct. Our ancestors said that it was a very powerful bird, a huge hawk. Its habitat was on the bare-peaked mountains, it did not frequent plains, but, when it flew abroad, it was seen by our ancestors. It was not seen every day, as its home was on the mountains. In appearance it was red, black and white. It was a bird of fine plumage, of a greenish-yellow aspect, and had plumes on its head; a large bird, like a moa in size. Its antagonist was a hawk; the hawk said that he could reach the heavens, the hokioi said that he only could do so, this was their subject of contention. Then said the hokioi to the hawk—"What sign will you give?" The hawk replied—"Ke." The hawk asked the hokioi:—"And what then will be your cry?" Said the hokioi—"This—Hokioi! Hokioi! Hu - u!" Such were their remarks. Then they flew upwards, and, on nearing the heavens, winds arose and clouds appeared, so the hawk cried "Ke!" and returned to earth, baffled by the wind and clouds. As for the hokioi, it disappeared in the lofty heavens.

'Ke' is the cry of the hawk, and "Hokioi! Hokioi! Hu - u!" the cry of the hokioi, that is the latter word [Hu] represented the whirring sound of his wings when flying. None could fail to hear the whirring of his wings as he returned to earth."

PAGE 564
Here follows still another version of the fable—

"In olden times Hokioi and Kahu [harrier] disputed as to which could ascend to the greatest height in flight. Said Kahu: "You cannot fly so high that the earth is lost to view. You cannot fly any higher than does the fern bird." This so angered Hokioi that he challenged the harrier to a trial, as to which could ascend the highest. So both commenced their flight, but, when the harrier had ascended a certain distance, he saw a fern plain on fire and at once descended in order to prey on the vermin that were trying to escape from the fire, whereupon Hokioi cried:—"He pakiwaha Koe"—[You are a boaster]. Then Hokioi continued his upward flight, and went so far that he never returned to earth again, but sometimes at night Hokioi is heard calling out his own name in derision to the Kahu, thus—"Hokioi! Hokioir!"