Flying Men
We have already seen that certain atua maori possessed the power of flight. One would naturally expect such a being as Rongomai, the personified form of meteors, to be an active atua, and this is borne out by many accounts of his flying through space, as when he flew into the Rangiuru pa at Otaki, when a force was attacking it. Is it not recorded also how Rongomai took one Raikaumoana on his back and bore him through space from PAGE 590Gladstone to Pahiatua, and so originated the name of the latter place (see vol. 15 of the Journal of the Polynesian Society at p. 146).

The story of the flying man Tamarau is the most definite fable of the kind that the Maori has given us. Rawaho and Tamarau are said to have been sons of an old-time voyager named Hape, who is said to have reached these isles from Polynesia some six centuries ago, more or less. Hape having died in the South Island his two sons set off to recover his body, and also the maun or life principle of the kumara or sweet potato that he had taken with him. During the performance of certain mortuary rites over the body of their parent, Tamarau, who was the younger son, acquired the mana tapu of Hape, and so became endowed with marvellous powers. During their return to the Bay of Plenty district they disagreed anent the performance of certain tasks that affect the condition of tapu persons, and so Rawaho set off by himself from the hill at Waiohau, where the dispute had taken place. As Rawaho was trudging down the Maiohau flats of the Rangitaiki valley he heard a hail from above, and, looking up, saw Tamarau flying through space toward the coast, and the commanding hill he flew from has since been known as Arorangi. Tamarau came to earth on a hill overlooking the Owhaikawa swamp, after which he flew to Ohiwa; he has ever since been viewed as an atua, and we may include him as a deified ancestor. If he was not a genuine ancestor the Maori believes that he was.

A people possessing wings and the power of flying are said to have settled at Waitotara, north of Whanganui, in remote times. In Taylor's Te Ika a Maui p. 33-34 we are told that they were descended from Turi of Aotea, that they had for long no permanent home, but flew from place to place, now to the forest ranges and anon seaward. Famous tohunga, such as Papahurihia and Murua, are credited with having possessed powers of flight, but alas! proof of these interesting exhibitions is lacking!

The dread ogre known as Tama at Hikurangi mountain must presumably have possessed the power of flight, to judge from the stories that are told about him, and which we have noticed.

Giants in human form are seldom mentioned in Maori folk tales, but there is a story of a company of giants that once occupied the isle of Rangitoto, near Auckland. The place of the giant of European myths is here taken by taniwha and turehu. Herculean tasks are not performed by giants in Maori myth but by such creatures as Turehu. Thus the lava reef that forms part of PAGE 591the old lava flow from Mt Albert into Waitemata harbour is said to represent an attempt made by a travelling party of Turehu to form a causeway across the harbour. This task had to be performed during the hours of darkness, as is usual with such uncanny folk, but daylight arrived ere it was completed, hence the unfinished condition of the causeway as now seen.

A folk tale may be connected with any rock, tree, hill, or other natural feature seen when travelling. In many places boulders are said to represent persons who flourished in the long ago. On the summit of the rocky hill at Tinui known as Pukerakuraku is said to be a canoe that has been turned into stone, a local native informed me that it is the canoe of Kupe, the old sea wanderer of forty generations ago. We also know, or the Maori does, that the canoe of Maui, he who raised New Zealand from the azure main, rests in stone form on the summit of Mt Hikurangi. We are not told how these deep sea craft came to rest on the summits of lofty hills, in this particular the Noah's Ark myth is more satisfactory.