How Waikato and Rangitaiki Raced Seaward
In days of old, when strange things happened in Aotearoa, strife arose among the great rivers of the land, in that Waikato and Rangitaiki disputed as to which would first reach their parent Wainui, that is to say the ocean. Rangitaiki stoutly maintained that it would rapidly outpace or outflow Waikato. So Waikato started from the base of Tongariro, and the other from the base of Kaimanawa. Now Waikato and Whangaehu started together, and the latter argued that they should flow southward to their parent Wainui, inasmuch as he bore with him certain health-giving qualities of Wainui. The remark made by Whangaehu that it contained the healthful salt water was quite correct, and Whangaehu maintained that its mother Wainui gave it that salt water that represented its welfare; Waikato consisted of sweet water, but Whangaehu was bitter water, such is still the healthful quality of Whangaehu as it flows from the base of Tongariro mountain. While Whangaehu urged Waikato to make for the south, waikato turned northward and so commenced his contest with Rangitaiki. Waikato maintained that it would reach Wainui, that is the ocean, first, but Rangitaiki said: "Not so, I will be the first to arrive"—and so they disputed. Then commenced the race seaward of these great rivers; when Waikato reached the north side of Tauwhara mountain it sent out Torepatutahi as a scout or courier, in fact it sent out three such scouts. Rangitaiki likewise despatched its emissaries, and these were Waiirohia, Nga Tamawhine, Pokairoa, Pakekeheke and Waikowhewhe (all tributary streams on the left bank of Rangitaiki). The healthful influence of Rangitaiki is represented by Waimangeo, a large stream of bitter water that emerges from a hill. Waikato also sent forth a number of messengers (all are tributaries of that river) and listened intently for any sound of the advance of its rival, until, from afar off, came the roar of many waters as Rangitaiki flowed into the ocean, and so was the first to reach their mother Wainui. So disappointed was Waikato that it swerved westward from south of Paeroa and sought the western ocean; although many taniwha (monsters) assisted it in forcing a passage and opening up a channel, yet Waikato could not win the contest, while Rangitaiki succeeded in forging far ahead and so reaching the ocean at the Awa-a-te-atua.

PAGE 584
As noted above the various couriers despatched by the racing rivers were their own tributaries, those of the left bank of Rangi-taiki and those of the right bank of Waikato.

In vol. 21 of the Transactions of the New Zealand Institute is a paper entitled "Notes on the Waikato River basins", by L. Cussen, in which occur some remarks on the wandering habits of that river in times remote; at p. 408 we find the following remarks: "I may here mention a somewhat strange tradition which was mentioned to me by the Assistant Surveyor-General as having been related to him by Mr Lawry: That the Waikato River formerly ran into the sea near Tauranga; and that in the course of ages it changed its course and ran out into the Hauraki Gulf; and then, again, after a further lapse of time, it ran across by Tuakau and Mauku, and then into the Manukau Harbour; and thence into the sea at the mouth of the Wairoa River."

In another paper entitled "Notes on the Piako and Waikato River-basins", published in vol. 26 of the Transactions of the New Zealand Institute, Cussen returned to the subject—at p. 399 of the above paper appears the following: "I think it is more than probable that the Waikato at one time flowed through the Waiotapu Valley to the sea on the East Coast, ……But its channel was obstructed, probably by subterranean disturbance or the volcanic action in the Rotorua district; it quitted the original valley, and eroded for itself a new channel in nearly a due west direction, . . " By "east coast" Cussen seems to have meant the Bay of Plenty in this statement, but further on in his paper he gives some evidence that the Waikato river at a different period flowed through a well defined channel 14 miles from Cambridge to the Hauraki Gulf. Assuredly this wandering habit of the Waikato river reminds us of the Maori myth.

Hutton agrees with these statements in a paper published in vol. 32 of the same Journal (p. 180), viz, that the Waikato river first flowed into the Bay of Plenty by way of the Waiotapu valley, after that into the Hauraki Gulf, ere the gorge at Taupiri was cut. Hill gives a version of the Waikato-Rangitaiki race myth in vol. 43 of the Transactions describing how Waikato sent out Torepatutahi and other tributary messengers to ascertain how Rangitaiki was faring in the strenuous race.

The Clarence and Hurunui rivers of the South Island are known to natives as Waiau-toa and Waiau-uha, or male Waiau and female Waiau, and the latter is said to occasionally feel affection for Waiau-toa, which in some way produces rain, but the story is obscure.