Origin of the Taiaha and of the Kumara
The following is a specimen of the more puerile tales concerning the primal offspring, and is a story that might come PAGE 593under the heading of origin myths or personifications. It is the story of a quarrel that occurred between Tumatanenga and Rongo anent their cultivation ground called Pohutukawa. Tu set off in search of weapons wherewith to fight, and went to Ruru-tangiakau, from whom sprang the ake-rautangi tree from which weapons such as taiaha, etc., were fashioned. Ruru gave him his own child, Ake-rautangi, he who has two mouths, four eyes, four ears and four nostrils. This quaint description denotes the two-handed weapon termed a taiaha and the two series of features pertain to the double-faced head carved on the weapon. In the strenuous fight known as Moengatoto, Rongo-maraeroa was defeated by Tu, and the slain of Rongo were cooked and eaten by Tu. Now Rongo represents the sweet potato and Tu represents man, and when the survivors of the Rongo party escaped they fled to Pani and found a refuge in her stomach. When it was desirable that food should be cooked Pani fired her oven, and then men said, one to another: "Where is the food to be cooked in this oven?" Then Pani proceeded to the water where she gathered up the kumara and took them away to cook them, when cooked she divided them among the people. Such were the meals prepared morning and night in times of peace but in time of war, when raiders were afield, then food supplies were principally the aka o tuwhenua or aruhe, the roots of Pteris aquilina var. esculenta (the common fern).

On one occasion when Pani was so producing, that is giving birth to the kumara or sweet potato in water, one Patatai was watching her from the further bank of the waters of Mona-ariki, and he made with his lips a peculiar sound betokening amusement or contempt. Pani was so overcome by a feeling of shame that she fled homeward, weeping as she went, and so it is that we have retained the sweet potato. The charms repeated over the crops were derived from Pani, whose husband was Maui-wharekino. Tu destroyed the sweet potato lest Rongo should prevail in this world. Patatai, who overlooked Pani's method of producing sweet potatoes, probably represents the bird of that name, the land rail.