Shellfish as a Love Messenger
A peculiar branch of white magic was that devoted to love messages, to influencing persons of both sexes in connection with their affections; this included the influencing of persons far distant from the operator. Thus birds were used as messengers or mediums to convey such influences, and I was told that inanimate objects were occasionally so employed, such as feathers. Sometimes the necessary charm was simply launched in the wind when blowing in the right direction. But the most peculiar PAGE 576medium I have heard of in such recitals was a shellfish, which brings us to the story of Tao-putaputa and Tahito, two persons who flourished some eighteen generations ago. The former was a woman of Opape in the Bay of Plenty district, while Tahito was a man who lived on the Titirangi hill at Gisborne; these two met at a tribal meeting at Opotiki, and, when Tahito returned to his home, his desire for Tao grew apace. At last he resolved to gain the woman of his choice and so relied upon the peculiar arts that, with the Maori, come under the heading of atahu, Tao had shown no partiality for him so far, hence it was necessary to appeal to those unseen powers that render the charms of white magic efficient. Tahito busied himself in making a form of necklace which he duly scented and then inserted it in a ngaruru shell (Astroea sulcata). He then recited a charm over the shell and cast it into the sea where Titirangi looks down on Turanga nui a Ruamatua. That shell found its way round the coastline to the Bay of Plenty where it came to land at Opape. Ere long Tao came to the spot in order to obtain a supply of paua shellfish (Haliotis iris), but, she failed to find any, seeing nought save a ngaruru shell which she cast aside. After that no matter how or whither she wended her way that shell lay before her, until, vexed by its persistent reappearance, she picked it up again and then noticed the necklace it contained, this she drew out and fastened round her neck. No sooner had the charmed object come into contact with the woman's body than she was affected by the power of the charm and at once began to think of and yearn for the far distant Tahito. So strong did this feeling become that she was compelled to start off alone, and make her way across rugged forest ranges for a hundred miles or so in order to reach the man who had sent the charmed shell. According to the story Tao found her man Tahito at Titirangi, and the two became man and wife.

In the above tale we see that touching the shell container had no effect upon the woman, but that she was much affected by the charmed object it contained. In another version, however, the shell itself is the mediumistic object (for further particulars of this atahu rite see the Journal of the Polynesian Society, vol. 35, p. 315).