Tamaika and Hanokai
The Ngati-awa folk of the Bay of Plenty quote a saying concerning one of their ancestors, viz, "Kopaki tuhera tu ana Tamaika" (When a package [of cooked eels] is opened Tamaika will be there). This Tamaika was a gourmand who was very partial to the flesh of eels, and made it his business to know when his neighbours had made a good catch, when he would watch for the smoke of oven fires and make his appearance as the cooked PAGE 588eels, wrapped in leaves, were being taken from the ovens. Thus Tama became a nuisance to his neighbors, and it must be remembered that a community-minded people, with all their altruistic professions, can be extremely sarcastic, not to say churlish, when persons roam the land in search of the unearned increment. The above saying was heard when a tangata matiro hai, a food cadger, appeared at a hamlet.

A similar story is told of how Hanokai, an extremely lazy man who dwelt hard by the home of one Tama-ki-te-wananga, a man renowned for his industry and forethought. Hau was a very frequent visitor at the home of Tama, at any time the smoke of an oven fire would attract him. At length the patience of Tama was exhausted, and so one morning he called out to his attendant: "Let there be no delay in preparing food ere Hanokai arrives." But Hanokai had already arrived, and he overheard the instructions of Tama, hence he asked: "O Tama! What is that about me?" Tama replied: "You come so often", whereupon Hau explained: "I come often because we are related to each other." Said Tama, "Quite so, but let it be an occasional visit." But Hanokai was angry, and so he said: "Enough, we will meet next time in the spirit world." On my relating this story to Tom Ransfield of Ngati-Raukawa, he remarked: "Bear in mind the story of another food-begging person, Hauokanga, whose sister Hinerongo was annoyed by his frequent visits at meal times. One day he went to her home and chanced to hear her thus addressing the fire where food for her children was to be cooked: "Burn and blaze up, lest ye be forestalled by Hauokanga." Then Hau said: "And what of me, O Hinerongo?" His sister Hinerongo replied: "You are always coming here and so there is little food for my children." Hauohanga said: "I came often because we are closely related, but now we part forever." Such simple stories are often widely known, but, as in these cases, the names of persons often differ, also the details of the story.