The Tuatara and the Kumukumu
We have another fable concerning the tuatara lizard and the kumukumu or gurnard, originally these two lived together on land. At a certain time the news came that Mahuika was abroad and ranging over far lands. Of what nature is that person, Mahuika? She is a consuming fire that spreads over the land and shrivels up trees, herbage and persons, all these she consumes. On account of these reports Kumukumu the gurnard said to Tuatara the great lizard (Sphenodon punctatum): "O! Let us hie to the water, for water only can overcome Mahuika"—whereupon Tuatara replied: "If we go to the water realm we shall be captured, slain and eaten. I will remain on land where all will fear me, but as for you, truly you will grace a basket of food and be served up at a feast." Said Kumukumu: "Yes, we are both in the same position, for eventually you will be slain, cooked and eaten." And the remarks of these two were just, for is it not known that the tuatara lizard was sought by the Maori, and formed a part of his food supply. Many were formerly taken at the Rua-hakoakoa, in the Rotorua district, and those who sought them went at dawn to do so, for it was necessary that they be taken ere the people partook of food. If this rule was not kept then the lizards would be aggressive and bite those who handled them. Near Mt Hikurangi of the Waiapu district is a high hill named Taitai and hard by was a fortified village named Te Pad o Paia in olden days. The people of that village found a number of eggs of the tuatara, which they promptly took home, cooked and ate. The result was that village and people were pokea e te tuatara, invaded and beset by great numbers of these large lizards, even that the village had to be deserted.

In another version we are told that the offspring of Tangaroa and those of Pekerau, that is fish and lizards, argued as to which realm they should dwell in. Said the lizard: "Let us remain on land." Replied the fish: "Let us dwell in the water, abide ye on land to be loathed, then shall shame assail you and cause you to burrow under the herbage to conceal yourself." Replied the PAGE 570lizard: "Very well, go to your waters that you may be caught in a net and have your flesh dried in the sun as food for man." So it is that the repulsive lizard is known as Tu-te-wehiwehi and Tu-te-wanawana.