The Korotangi Myth
In vol. 22 of the Transactions of the New Zealand Institute pp. 499-506 occurs an account of a carved stone bird said to have been found by a Maori in a pit. This pit is termed a rua in the published account, and this may denote that it was found in an old store-pit, as used for potatoes. This account contributed by Major Wilson is to the effect that it was claimed by the natives that the stone bird had been brought by their ancestors from their traditional homeland of Hawaiki, and that some of the leading chiefs of Waikato greeted this relic of their forbears with tears PAGE 567and song. On the other hand, von Haast stated in 1881 that "the stone bird has been carved with a sharp implement, either of iron or bronze, of which, as we know, the Maori had no knowledge; the lines are all cut so evenly that it could not have been done with a stone implement." (Transactions of the New Zealand Institute, vol. 14, p. 104, et. seq.) This seems to show that our Maori friends have built up an interesting little story on a non-Maori artifact.

A certain song has been frequently quoted as proof of the Maori tale, but the bird mentioned in that song is, in most versions, called Korotau, not Korotangi, and the evidence goes to show that it was a tamed duck (parera) owned by one Tohiariki. While the tamer and owner of the bird was absent from home his wife neglected to feed the bird, hence it left the hamlet and went off to forage for itself. When Tohi returned home he composed a song the wording of which tends to show that his bird was a tamed duck possessing no abnormal qualities. The translations of the song given in the Transactions are somewhat one-sided in places, the line referring to the huruhuru whakairoiro does not refer to a bird with carved plumage from afar, the reference is to decorative or ornamental plumage, and to render the line "Ka tomo ki te whare takuate kau au" as "Into the house enters my liver heedlessly" is to credit friend Tohi's liver with erratic and abnormal activities. Tohi entered his hut as the shades of night fell and grieved over his lost pet.

The account of Korotangi that I collected speaks of it as a bird, a grey duck, but also as a creature possessing abnormal and uncanny powers, and explains that, after death, its body was in some way converted into stone, so that apparently it was never carved. The account runs as follows: "That bird Korotangi was a grey duck that was well versed in all matters pertaining to old time wars. Should a hostile party be on its way to slay its master that bird would know all about it, and so the people would be forewarned. Ever did that bird act in that way, warning the people of danger. The bird belonged to Te Haupa of the Tainui clan.

The cause of the death of that bird was its habit of looking for food among the ovens; being driven away from the ovens by those tending them the bird was much abashed, and so went away to other parts. Coming by way of Kawhia to Aotea it remained there and was seen by the people of those parts, who endeavoured to capture it, but failed. The owner of the bird came PAGE 568in search of it, lamenting its loss as he came. On reaching Pourewa he again bewailed his loss in song.

No sooner had Te Haupa concluded his song than the lost bird appeared from a swamp, whereupon he sprang forward and caught it. The bird then told Te Haupa that it was about to die, and said: 'I am in deep distress at having been driven away from the vicinity of the food ovens.' So that bird perished at Tahuri, at Aotea, and was buried at the margin of the swamp; now, when a European named Neiha was digging a well he found that bird, which was recognised by a number of persons. Te Haupa, the owner of that bird, has long been dead, but the line of descent from him is known, he it was who made it known to all that the bird had died and had been buried by him near the swamp at Tahuri.

My father did not know the persons who witnessed the finding of that bird by the Europeans, but we heard casually that that bird had been found by one Neiha, a European. It was when he was digging a well that the bird was found by that European, and it had been turned into stone. Certain persons are quite aware that that bird turned into stone after its death and its burial by its master.

According to my father and my people this is an old tale, and this is all I have heard about this bird, though other persons may know more about it."