The Sandfly and the Mosquito
It fell upon a certain day that the Sandfly and the Mosquito foregathered, when the Sandfly said: "O friend! Let us go and attack the Man tribe." Said Naeroa the Mosquito: "Let us await the shades of night."

"Not so, " said Namu the Sandfly—"Let us attack in the day time."

But the Mosquito persisted that they should attack Man by night, lest they be seen approaching and so perish at the hands of Man. The Sandfly remarked:—"Let us assail Man in great numbers so as to confuse him, thus shall he be overcome by us."

Said the Mosquito: "Better the night; then, as we approach him, we will raise our voices, and he shall be confused by the murmuring sounds and strike wildly while we are yet afar off. Thus shall he but strike himself, while we dart silently in to the attack."

But the Sandfly would have none of these methods, and persisted in following his own plan. Said he to the Mosquito: "Enough; as you are afraid, I alone of us two will go forth."

Away went the Sandfly, gathered his people together, and sallied forth to attack Man. Then were seen the countless multitudes of the Sandfly folk as they swarmed around Man, clung to him and bit him. And then, as Man felt the attack, he turned to defend himself, and vigorously assailed the tribe of PAGE 579Namu-kanone. One slap of his great hand and a myriad Sandfly folk perished. In vain did they fiercely assail his face and hands in vast numbers. The slaps of Man fell fast and multitudes of the Sandfly tribe fell in death. Even so came about the great defeat of these folk, and the survivors fled afar off to escape the dreadful blows of Man. Now came Namu, the Sandfly, and reported to Naeroa, the Mosquito: "We are lost. Nought remains save the drifting waters, the wailing winds of desolate space; nor courage, nor numbers saved us."

Then Naeroa the Mosquito lifted his voice in lament for the Sandfly folk and sang this dirge:

I said, I said
Remain, remain
Lest slain ye be, lest slain ye be
By hand of Man
And all be lost.

Then the Sandfly chanted his lament as he wept for his lost kinsmen:

Although we fell
Although we fell
Yet still his blood
Yet still his blood
was shed by us.

And thus it is that, in the long fight waged between the Sandfly folk and Man, the tribe of Namu perish in their thousands at the hands of Man, but ever do they console themselves with the fact that the blood of man has been shed by them.

When the shades of evening fell, off set Naeroa to avenge the defeat of the Sandfly folk. As he approached Man he raised his voice in mosquito song, and Man, believing that he was attacked, strove to slay Naeroa, but merely slapped his own ear. Naeroa now approached him on the other side in the same deceitful manner, and with the same result, for the Man merely struck himself a blow on his other ear, while Naeroa escaped. This contest was long continued, but ever Naeroa escaped, while Man slapped himself so frequently about his ears that he became quite deaf, and his anger against his enemies was great. But now that he could no longer hear, the Mosquito folk attacked him in great numbers and with ferocious onslaught. Nought was heard save the ceaseless song of the Mosquito folk and the slapping of the hands of Man as he thwacked himself to no avail.

PAGE 580
When morning dawned, behold, the face of Man was so swollen that he could no longer see, thus he was both Deaf and Blind. As the sun rose, the tribe of Naeroa departed, for the Sandfly folk were avenged. But ever the war continues between Man and his old enemies, Namu the Sandfly and Naeroa the Mosquito.

Now the reason why the Sandfly folk attacked Tu, that is to say mankind, for man is a descendant of Tu, was that Namuiria, the son of Namu the Sandfly, was slain by Tu for having taken by stealth the hau, the aura of Tu, and so endangered his welfare. Thus it is that the sandfly ever wages war against man. Sandflies and mosquitoes are but a feckless lot, and they are at the mercy of the winds; when winds arrive then both sandflies and mosquitoes fly to their forbears Haumia and Te Monehu (bracken fern) for shelter and succour. But the Ngapuhi folk tell us that, in remote times, a new canoe of great size was made at a certain place, and great preparations were made for the task of hauling the hull from the forest; many men were called upon to assemble and take part in it, and the Mosquito and Sandfly folk were also asked to assist. All the persons who took part in the strenuous hauling job were well fed, all but the Naeroa and Namu folk, the mosquito and sandfly tribes; and these received no food whatever for their valuable services, hence they resolved to devote their energies to the assailing of mankind for all time. Previous to that time no attacks had been made by them on man.