The Popokorua and the Kihikihi; the Ant and the Cicada
Said the ant to the cicada: "O friend! Let us be diligent during the fine summer days and store up food for the cold winter period." "Not so" said the cicada—"Rather let us ascend the PAGE 577trees and cling to the sun-warmed bark, singing our song of joy." So these two failed to agree, but the ant spent its time in collecting food and in conveying it to its store pits, while the idle cicada said: "How fine is it to bask in the sun and enjoy life, and how foolish is the ant who ever toils, and dwells in doleful places." After a time the warmth went out of the sun, food supplies became short, the cold winds and rains of winter smote the land; it was then that the homeless and foodless cicada perished, but Popokorua the ant, how snug is he in his underground home, well stocked with food.

The following is the song of Kihikihi the cicada as he clung to his ancestor Tane and sang his day-long pean: "He pai aha koia taku pai? He noho nei piri ake ki te peka o te rakau, me te whaka-tangi kau i aku paihau" (What truly is my pleasure? It is to stay clinging to a tree branch clapping my wings). The following chant extols the wisdom of the ant in preparing for hard times: "Hohoro mai, e te hoa, kanake e whaka-roa. Ara rat ka turua ta te popokorua. Rawe noa tarigata ki whaka-hauhau mai ki te keri i te rua mo te na o te rangi, me te makariri wero iho i te po, me te kohi mai ano i te kakano haiora mo tamaroto kia ora ai." (Hasten, O friend! Delay not; how diligent is the ant, how wise to hasten the excavating of pits wherein to shelter from rain and the cold that pierces nightly, also the collecting of seeds as sustenance for the inner man whereby to retain life).

The Awa folk of Whakatane also give the following as a song of the cicada; old Pio of Te Teko wrote as follows—"Here follows the song of a very numerous folk of this world, the folk known as the rattling cicadas who are very, very numerous. When summer comes those folk cling to their ancestor Tane-mahuta, and here is their song: "Kaore te waru nei ka piri au ki a Tane-mahuta, ki toku tupuna,—tutakere, tutakere, iere nui au, kohiti ko makaro iere au. Popo nunui, popo roroa, ko wai e aha atu; na Tane ano au i axvhi ki tua te aro rangi; ka whiti mai ko te iwa ka hoki au ki raw ra ki tona kainga, maua tahi ko taku taina ko Anuhe i tonoa iho nei ki tona tungane, ki a Rongo, hei manawa mona, koia ka tumoumoutia." Herein the cicada seems to announce his intention to retire underground on the approach of winter in company with the anuhe, the large caterpillar sent down to prey on the kumara (sweet potato) of Rongo. It was Rangi himself who bade Anuhe descend to this world; in one version of the myth, in another version Whanui (the star Vega) said to Anuhe, Toronu and Moka, three species of caterpillar pests: "Go you below to your elder brother Rongo, who will sustain you." So PAGE 578these pests were sent down here to prey on the sweet potato that had been purloined from Whanui by Rongomaui (see Dominion Museum Bulletin 9, p. 102, 1976 reprint), another of these tarakihi (cicada) songs was recorded by Sir George Grey and may be found at p. 216 of Nga Moteatea.

Anuhe the caterpillar obtained the fine designs marked on his body from Tawatawa the mackerel, hence the saying so often heard among us—"he anuhe tawatawa".