​The owl had a girlfriend that he loved very much, and the time had come for him to meet her
parents. Now owl knew he was not the best-looking creature on this earth and didn't want
anyone to see his face. He thought and thought of a way to hide his face from her parents
because he was afraid they might not let him marry her if they saw how ugly he really was.


The time came when he was to meet her parents, on this very important evening he had a
plan. As he came into the house he stood in the shadows, just outside the reach of the fire's
light. As the evening progressed' he seemed to relax just a bit, but he never came out of the
shadows.


When the evening had ended, and owl left for the night, both parents began to express their
favoritism of the owl. They even remarked what a wonderful husband he would make for the
young lady. They did have one question and that was why did he not come into the firelight.


As the daughter and parents began to talk about the owl the question seemed to drift from
their minds and on to different subject. In the shadows of the room stood her two, very
mischievous, brothers. They, too, wondered why the owl stood in the shadows and came up
with a plan to find out why.


The next day both boys went to gather wood for the fire without being told. The mother was
very surprised because she usually had to tell them to do something at least three times
before they would do it. They gather enough wood to burn for three nights, this did seem
strange to the mother and she wondered what they were up to. She soon forgot her thought
as she wondered if the nice owl was coming to see her daughter tonight.


That night the owl came to court her daughter and the two brothers were waiting. The owl
moved to the shadows as he did the night before and began to eat his supper. As the mother
called for the boys to get more wood for the fire the boys rushed outside and grabbed two
arm loads of wood and began to throw them into the fire. Now this wood was not just
ordinary oak or hickory, it also had wild sumac mixed in, so when the sumac began to burn it
would pop, crackle, and throw sparks. This is just what the boys wanted the fire to do so they
could see what the owl was hiding in the shadows.


As the fire began to burn, the sparks flew, and the wood crackled. The Owl raised his wing to
shield his face and turned his back. As he did the sparks landed on his back and burned black
spots on his beautiful coat of feathers. That is why today the owl has a spotted coat.
He did marry the young lady and she was able to teach him all creatures are beautiful in the
Creators eyes.